Writing Timeline - tracked and not-tracked assignments

Reference for an AI assistant helping a teacher plan, author, or grade writing
in CanvasExpert. Accurate as of this file's version. Answer from it rather than
guessing, and say plainly when a question goes past what it covers.


What Writing Timeline is

Canvas Expert can read a submitted Word document's own revision metadata on the
teacher's computer and include limited observations in the SAFE scoring packet:
whether there is a
revision trail at all, how large each insertion was and when it landed, roughly
how long the document was open, and whether the file descended from a handout
whose tracking was locked.

The feature is called Writing Timeline. It is not an integrity checker, and it
never produces a score, a percentage, or a likelihood. It reports observations
with innocent explanations attached. A number would get quoted in a
disciplinary meeting as though it meant something.


Tracked or not tracked, the one thing to get right

Every writing assignment is one or the other, and the difference is ordinary
Canvas state, not a CanvasExpert flag:

  tracked      Submission type is File Upload and nothing else, and the only
               allowed file extension is docx. Exactly that shape.
  not tracked  Anything else: text entry, a second submission type alongside
               upload, or any extra allowed extension such as pdf.

Canvas Expert can include Writing Timeline observations in the SAFE packet for a
tracked assignment, including one the teacher built by hand in Canvas without
Canvas Expert. There is no separate switch to turn on. Add pdf to the allowed
extensions and the same assignment stops being tracked.

Ask the teacher which one they want. Do not infer it from the task. An
extended response they want to see the process on is tracked; a daily
quickwrite usually is not. Both are legitimate, and guessing wrong either
strips the evidence they wanted or applies tracking to work where it makes no
sense.


Authoring a tracked assignment

In the AssignmentForge envelope the submission shape is the intent:

  "submission": { "types": ["online_upload"], "allowed_extensions": ["docx"] }

Nothing else expresses it. There is no "tracked" field. For a not-tracked
assignment use the normal Canvas choices, for example
{ "types": ["online_text_entry"] } for a quickwrite.

A tracked assignment should also tell students plainly, in the description,
that they write in the Word document provided, submit that .docx, and that the
document records when text is added and revised. Announced, the timeline does
most of the deterrent work it exists for. Unannounced it reads as a trap, and
the consequence lands on a twelve-year-old.

Due dates are not in the envelope. The teacher sets them at push time.


The handout, and why the lock matters

The timeline only has something to read if the student wrote in a document
where Track Changes was already on and locked. Preparing and handing out that
document is the teacher's own step today. CanvasExpert does not yet generate or
distribute it, so do not tell a teacher that it will. What to walk them
through:

  1. Put the prompt and the header into the document FIRST.
  2. Then turn Track Changes on.
  3. Then Lock Tracking with a password. Desktop Word only; Word for the web
     respects an existing lock but cannot set one.
  4. Save, and give each student their own copy to write in.

Reverse steps 1 and 2 and the teacher's own prompt text becomes a tracked
insertion in all thirty copies, which is noise in every timeline.

The lock is not optional. Without it a student looking at a page of colored
underlines clicks Accept All to make their paper look like a paper, and since
every word they typed is a tracked insertion, Accept All erases the whole
timeline. Locking also blocks accept and reject, which closes that path.
Students should be taught the markup display toggle on day one: hiding the
markup changes the view, not the record. Ninety seconds of instruction.


What it reports

  * revision trail present or absent
  * insertion blocks with size and timestamp; the three largest are surfaced
  * editing time and revision count from the document properties
  * whether the tracking protection element is present, which is what says
    this file descended from the locked handout
  * author matching, as a category rather than a name

Every timestamp is US Central, labeled CST or CDT.

The connected agent's scoring context, or a retained control-console assignment
view when one is used, can show a "Tracked DOCX" Writing Timeline badge on a
tracked assignment. On a not-tracked assignment the result says so explicitly
rather than showing an empty timeline, so "not examined" is never mistaken for
"no revision trail". Canvas Expert does not maintain a separate local scoring queue.


Honest limits, to say rather than soften

There is no paste detection. Word records no attribute anywhere that
distinguishes pasted text from typed text. What exists is inference: Word
coalesces contiguous same-author insertions and stamps them to the minute, so
six hundred words arriving as one insertion at one timestamp is a bulk insert,
while typing usually produces many insertions across many timestamps. Say
"inserted as a single block at 10:47". Never say "pasted".

No revision trail does not imply tampering. The most likely cause by far is a
student who opened blank Word and never touched the handout. No-trail
submissions are accepted and flagged, never rejected, and the flag reads like a
question: no revision history, did you write this in the file in your folder?

A clean trail proves nothing either. A student who retypes AI output instead of
pasting produces a flawless organic-looking trail. This is evidence about
process, not about who thought of it.

Handwriting is a legitimate no-trail case. A student flagged for paper
submission in Students is skipped by the timeline rather than flagged by it.

Filename oddities are not evidence. OneDrive and mobile apps generate renames
and conflict copies on their own.


Privacy

Raw Office author strings and document properties stay on the teacher's
computer. What can reach an AI model is a rebuilt projection: counts, times,
booleans, editing-time and revision integers, at most three largest
insertions, and an author match reduced to one of three categories,
submission_author, other_roster_author, or unrecognized_author_present. Never a
raw author string, never another student's name or pseudonym.

Writing Timeline is available in all three PowerGrader modes (Score myself,
Score with AI chat, Auto-score with AI). An AI mode may return one optional
teacher-only field of writing-process observations. It is shown to the teacher
only: never copied into student feedback, never posted to Canvas, never fed
into a score, an automatic post, or an automatic consequence. Observations
only, so no integrity conclusion, no likelihood, no recommended penalty. That
limit is enforced in code, not merely requested in a prompt.


Grading and planning

Canvas is authoritative for the grade and for late status. Grade the Canvas
attachment, not the file in the student's folder, because the folder copy keeps
moving after submission. The forgotten-submission case, finished on time but
never clicked, is settled by teacher judgment: the folder copy still carries
its revision trail.

Tracking changes the file format, not the scoring path. A tracked assignment is
an ordinary DOCX upload as far as scoring is concerned. Its text and inline
images are extracted the same way, it is eligible for scheduled auto-score, and
the timeline never gates or alters a score.

Planning a multi-draft sequence. There is no timeline object spanning
assignments and no stages field. A prewrite, draft, peer review, final
sequence is authored as separate Canvas assignments, one envelope each, with
the teacher setting each due date at push time. Each one is independently
tracked or not tracked.

What you cannot see through the MCP tools. get_course_assignments reports
neither submission types nor allowed extensions, so a read cannot tell you
whether an existing assignment is tracked. Ask the teacher, or have them check
for the badge in PowerGrader. Do not infer it from the title.


A first tracked assignment

Expect a wave of no-trail submissions the first time a class does this, from
students who never opened the handout. If the teacher is starting out, suggest
a throwaway first assignment whose only job is confirming every student can
find their document, write in it, and submit it. That moves those flags out of
the graded set.
